AriGraph: Learning Knowledge Graph World Models with Episodic Memory for
LLM Agents
Petr Anokhin1 , Nikita Semenov2 , Artyom Sorokin1 , Dmitry Evseev2 , Andrey
Kravchenko4 , Mikhail Burtsev3 and Evgeny Burnaev2,1
1AIRI, Moscow, Russia
2Skoltech, Moscow, Russia
3London Institute for Mathematical Sciences, London, UK
4University of Oxford, UK
anokhin@airi.net
Abstract
Advancements in the capabilities of Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs) have created a promis-
ing foundation for developing autonomous agents.
With the right tools, these agents could learn to
solve tasks in new environments by accumulating
and updating their knowledge. Current LLM-based
agents process past experiences using a full his-
tory of observations, summarization, retrieval aug-
mentation. However, these unstructured memory
representations do not facilitate the reasoning and
planning essential for complex decision-making. In
our study, we introduce AriGraph, a novel method
wherein the agent constructs and updates a mem-
ory graph that integrates semantic and episodic
memories while exploring the environment.
We
demonstrate that our Ariadne LLM agent, con-
sisting of the proposed memory architecture aug-
mented with planning and decision-making, effec-
tively handles complex tasks within interactive text
game environments difficult even for human play-
ers. Results show that our approach markedly out-
performs other established memory methods and
strong RL baselines in a range of problems of vary-
ing complexity.
Additionally, AriGraph demon-
strates competitive performance compared to ded-
icated knowledge graph-based methods in static
multi-hop question-answering.
1
Introduction
Impressive language generation capabilities of large language
models (LLMs) has sparked substantial interest in their ap-
plication as core components for creating autonomous agents
capable of interacting with dynamic environments and exe-
cuting complex tasks. Over the past year, the research com-
munity has explored general architectures and core modules
for such LLM agents [Wang et al., 2024; Sumers et al., 2024;
Cheng et al., 2024]. A crucial property of a general cogni-
tive agent is its ability to accumulate and use knowledge. A
long-term memory allows an agent to store and recall past ex-
periences and knowledge, enabling it to learn from previous
encounters and make informed decisions. However, the ques-
tion of the best way to equip an agent with these capabilities
remains open. Despite the constraints inherent in transformer
architectures, contemporary methods enable LLMs to man-
age contexts encompassing millions of tokens [Ding et al.,
2024b]. However, this approach proves inefficient for agents
required to maintain continuous interaction with their envi-
ronment. Such agents must hold an entire historical context in
memory to perform actions, which is not only costly but also
limited in handling complex logic hidden in vast amounts of
information. Research into alternative frameworks like Re-
current Memory Transformer [Bulatov et al., 2022; Bulatov
et al., 2024] and MAMBA [Gu and Dao, 2023] seeks to pro-
vide long-term memory solutions, though these models are
still in their infancy.
Currently, the most popular solution for incorporating
memory to LLM agents is the Retrieval-Augmented Gener-
ation (RAG) approach. RAG in a form of vector retrieval
leverages an external database to enhance the model’s prompt
with relevant information. This technique is commonly used
in memory architectures for LLM agents, often to recall spe-
cific observations or learned skills. However, it suffers from
unstructured nature, greatly reducing the ability to retrieve
related information, which may be scattered throughout the
agent’s memory. These limitations can be overcome by us-
ing knowledge graphs as database. This approach has also
experienced a resurgence with the advent of LLMs [Pan et
al., 2024]. However, for a robust memory architecture, in-
tegrating both structured and unstructured data is essential.
In cognitive science, this integration parallels the concepts of
semantic and episodic memories. Semantic memory encom-
passes factual knowledge about the world, whereas episodic
memory pertains to personal experiences, which often con-
tain richer and more detailed information. Though tradition-
ally considered separate due to their distinct neurological rep-
resentations, recent studies suggest these memory types are
interconnected [Wong Gonzalez, 2018]. Semantic knowledge
is built upon the foundation of episodic memory and subse-
quently provides a structured base for associative memory.
This allows for the integration of various memory aspects,
including episodic memories themselves.
In our research, we have developed a memory architecture
arXiv:2407.04363v3  [cs.AI]  15 May 2025
B
ours
     Ariadne LLM Agent 
   AriGraph
Decision making
Episodic memory
Specific events 
Semantic memory
Accumulated general 
knowledge
Environment
A
Figure 1: (A) The architecture of our Ariadne agent, equipped with AriGraph memory. AriGraph integrates both semantic knowledge graph
and past experiences. Memory in the form of a semantic knowledge graph extended with episodic vertices and edges significantly enhances
the performance of LLM-agent in text-based games. (B) The average performance of our agent on text games, compared to various baselines
including human players and other LLM memory implementations. The LLM-agents differ only in the memory module, while the decision-
making component remains identical across all versions. The results for the agents are displayed for the top three out of five runs. For human
players, the results are presented as both the top three and the average across all participants.
called Ariadne’s Graph (AriGraph), that integrates semantic
and episodic memories within a memory graph framework. A
knowledge graph represents a network of interconnected se-
mantic knowledge, while episodic memories are depicted as
episodic edges that can connect multiple relations within the
graph. As an agent interacts with environment, it learns joint
semantic and episodic world model by updating and extend-
ing knowledge graph based memory. This architecture not
only serves as a foundational memory framework but also
aids in environmental modeling, improving spatial orienta-
tion and exploration capabilities. For the general framework
of our LLM agent called Ariadne, we employed pipeline of
memory retrieval, planing and decision making. For evalua-
tion of proposed methods we set up experiments to study two
research questions.
RQ1. Can LLM based agents learn useful structured world
model from scratch via interaction with an environment?
RQ2. Does structured knowledge representation improve
retrieval of relevant facts from memory and enable effective
exploration?
We evaluated our agent in complex interactive tasks in
Textworld and NetHack environments [Cˆot´e et al., 2018;
K¨uttler et al., 2020]. Experimental results demonstrate that
our agent Ariadne can effectively learn through interactions
with environment and significantly outperforms other mem-
ory approaches for LLMs such as full history, summarization,
RAG, Simulacra [Park et al., 2023] and Reflexion [Shinn et
al., 2023]. We also show that our method outperforms exist-
ing reinforcement learning (RL) baselines. We also evaluated
our approach on the classical roguelike game NetHack, where
our agent with local observations achieved scores comparable
to an agent with ground-truth knowledge. Although AriGraph
was originally designed for an agent interacting with the en-
vironment, it also demonstrates competitive performance on
multi-hop question answering tasks.
2
AriGraph World Model
Memory graph structure.
AriGraph world model G =
(Vs, Es, Ve, Ee) consists of semantic (Vs, Es) and episodic
memory (Ve, Ee) vertices and edges (see Figure 2).
At
each step t agent receives observation ot and sends ac-
tion at back to the environment. The environment also re-
turns rewards rt that are not visible to the LLM agent but
are used to evaluate its performance.
The agent continu-
ously learns world model G by extracting semantic triplets
(object1, relation, object2) from textual observations ot.
• Vs is a set of semantic vertices. Semantic vertices corre-
spond to objects extracted from triplets.
• Es is a set of semantic edges. Semantic edge is a tuple
(v, rel, u), where u, v are semantic vertices and rel is a
relationship between them. Semantic edges essentially
represent triplets integrated in the semantic memory.
• Ve is a set of episodic vertices. Each episodic vertex
corresponds to an observation received from the envi-
ronment at the respective step vt
e = ot.
• Ee is a set of episodic edges.
Each episodic edge
et
e = (vt
e, Et
s) connects all semantic triplets Et
s extracted
from ot with each other and corresponding episodic ver-
tex vt
e. In other words episodic edges represent temporal
relationship “happened at the same time”.1
1Strictly speaking, episodic edges cannot be called edges or
Algorithm 1: Memory Graph Search
Input: set of queries Q, Vs, Es, Ve, Ee,
number of episodic vertices k, semantic
search depth d and width w
Result: retrieved episodic vertices V Q
e , retrieved
semantic triplets EQ
s
EQ
s ←∅,
foreach q in Q do
E′
s ←SemanticSearch(q, Vs, Es, d, w)
EQ
s ←EQ
s ∪E′
s
end
V Q
e
←EpisodicSearch(EQ
s , Ve, Ee, k)
return EQ
s , V Q
e
Constructing AriGraph.
Interaction with the environ-
ment can provide the agent with an information about the
world to create new or update previously acquired knowl-
edge. Given new observation ot, LLM agent extracts new
triplets as semantic vertices V t
s and edges Et
s. To find already
existing knowledge about the objects mentioned in ot a set
of all semantic edges Erel
s
incident to vertices V t
s is filtered
out. Then outdated edges in Erel
s
are detected by comparing
them with Et
s and removed from the graph. After clearing
outdated knowledge we expand semantic memory with V t
s
and Et
s. Episodic memory is updated by simply adding new
episodic vertex vt
e containing ot and new episodic edge that
connect all edges in Et
s with vt
e. Episodic nodes store agent’s
past history and episodic edges connects all knowledge re-
ceived at the same step. See Appendix E for prompts used to
extract new triplets and detect outdated knowledge.
Retrieval from AriGraph.
For successful decision-
making in a partially observable environment, the agent needs
to be able to retrieve relevant knowledge. Retrieval from the
AriGraph memory consists of two procedures: (1) a semantic
search returns the most relevant triplets (semantic edges) and
(2) an episodic search that, given extracted triplets, returns
the most relevant episodic vertices Ve. The pseudo-code for
the search is presented in the Algorithm 1.
Semantic search relies on semantic similarity and semantic
graph structure to recall the most relevant triplets. Given a
query, the retriever (pre-trained Contriever model [Izacard et
al., 2022]) selects the most relevant semantic triplets. Then,
the set of vertices incident to the found triplets is used to
recursively retrieve new edges from the graph. Depth and
breadth of the search can be controlled by respective hyper-
parameters d and w. For details see Appendix A.
Episodic search starts with the results of the semantic
search as an input. Episodic edges link the input triplets with
past episodic vertices representing observations. The number
of input triplets associated with a particular episodic vertex is
used to calculate their relevance:
rel(vi
e) =
ni
max(Ni, 1) log(max(Ni, 1)) ,
(1)
where ni is a number of input triplets incident to episodic
even hyperedges, because they connect vertices with multiple graph
edges, but for simplicity we call them edges or episodic edges.
edge ei, Ni is a total number triplets (semantic edges) inci-
dent to ei and log (max(Ni, 1)) is a weighting factor to pre-
vent high scores for low information observations. We apply
a log2(Ni) scaling to give more weight to observations with
more extracted triplets. Additionally, observations contain-
ing exactly one triplet are assigned zero weight, as they are
unlikely to provide information beyond the triplet itself. k
most relevant episodic vertices (containing respective obser-
vations) are returned as a result of the episodic search.
3
Ariadne cognitive architecture
To test utility of AriGraph world modelling method we pro-
pose an agentic architecture called Ariadne. Ariadne agent
interacts with an unknown environment to accomplish a goal
set by a user. Throughout this process, at each time step, the
agent learns a world model, plans and executes actions. Ari-
adne has long-term memory stored as AriGraph and working
memory containing information for current planning and de-
cision making.
Given an observation the agent updates world model and
retrieves semantic and episodic knowledge from AriGraph to
working memory. Working memory is also populated with
a final goal description, current observation, history of recent
observation and actions. At the planning stage, Ariadne agent
uses content of working memory to create new or update ex-
isting plan as a series of task-relevant sub-goals, each accom-
panied by a concise description. The planning module also
evaluates the outcomes of actions based on feedback from
the environment after each action at step t −1, adjusting the
plan accordingly.
The revised plan is added to the working memory which is
accessed by the decision-making module, tasked with select-
ing the most suitable action aligned with the current plan’s
objectives. This module adheres to the ReAct [Yao et al.,
2023] framework, requiring the agent to articulate the ratio-
nale behind an action before execution. Separation of plan-
ning from decision-making enables LLMs to focus on distinct
cognitive processes. In text-based environments an agent se-
lects an action from the list of valid actions. Our agent can
also use graph specific function for navigation utilizing its
memory module. It extends its action space with “go to loca-
tion” type commands and infers an optimal route to a target
location using spatial relations stored in a semantic graph.
4
Experimental Setup
4.1
TextWorld interactive environments
We compared Ariadne agent with alternative methods in a se-
ries of text based games involving spatial navigation, object
collection and tool manipulation.
Detailed descriptions of
each game, including their difficulty levels and environmen-
tal maps, can be found in the Appendix F. All these games
can be considered Partially Observable MDPs (POMDPs).
Such games have long been benchmarks for researching
agents capable of effectively remembering information and
establishing long-term dependencies [Parisotto et al., 2020;
Pleines et al., 2022; Sorokin et al., 2022].
Treasure Hunting. The primary objective is to retrieve
the hidden treasure, with a series of rooms providing keys
Ice
Kitchen
Recipe
Table
Tuna
Red
Pepper
Living
Room
Garden
Green
Pepper
Sofa
BBQ
Episodic
Memory
Semantic 
Memory
Semantic Edge:
Semantic Vertex:
Episodic edge:
Episodic Vertex:
contains
is in
is west of
ontains
A
New triplets: ["Room B, 
has,
Blue Locker"; "Room 
B, exits, north"
Outdated triplets: 
["player,
location, room a"]
AriGraph World 
Model Learning
reason_for_action: 
"white locker has 
not been located 
yet."
action_to_take: 
"go north"
{"sub_goal_1": 
"Explore unvisited 
rooms",
"reason": ...},
{"sub_goal_2": "Find 
and unlock the White 
Locker",...}, ...
      
Env
observation
action
Planning
Decision Making
Plan
Goal
Current observation 
Relevant semantic memories
Recent actions-observations 
 Relevant episodic memories
 Working Memory  
B 
Figure 2: AriGraph world model and Ariadne cognitive architecture. (A) AriGraph learns episodic and semantic knowledge during interaction
with unknown environment. At each time step t new episodic vertex (containing full textual observation ot) is added to the episodic memory.
Then LLM model parses observation ot to extract relevant relationships in a form of triplets (object1, relation, object2). These triplets are
used to update semantic memory graph. The connection between episodic and semantic memory occurs through episodic edges that link each
episodic vertex with all triplets extracted from respective observation. (B) Ariadne agent explores the environment and accomplishes tasks
with AriGraph. User sets goal to the agent. Working memory is populated with recent history of observations and actions, relevant semantic
and episodic knowledge retrieved from the AirGraph world model. Planing LLM module uses content of working memory to generate new
or update existing plan. Results of planning are stored back in working memory. Finally, a ReAct-based module reads memory content and
selects one of possible actions to be executed in the environment. Every observation triggers learning that updates agent’s world model.
and clues leading to the final goal. The basic variation has 12
rooms and 4 keys, hard one has 16 rooms and 5 keys and hard-
est contains 36 rooms, 7 keys and additional distract items in
every room.
Cleaning. The goal is to clean a house by identifying and
returning misplaced items to their correct locations. Environ-
ment consists of 9 rooms (kitchen, pool, etc.) and contains
11 misplaced items (among many other items). To solve the
problem, the agent needs to memorize the location of rooms
and objects, as well as reason about objects placement.
Cooking. The goal is to prepare and consume a meal by
following a recipe, selecting the correct ingredients, and us-
ing appropriate tools, while navigating in multi-room house.
The task is testing agents ability to remember relevant infor-
mation and plan according to it. Basic difficulty task features
9 locations and 3 ingredients and hard task features 12 loca-
tions and 4 ingredients, while hardest task also features closed
doors and inventory management.
For baselines we used Ariadne’s planning and decision
making module with one of the following types of memory
instead of AriGraph model: full history of observations and
actions, iterative summarization, RAG, RAG with Reflexion
[Shinn et al., 2023], and Simulacra - memory implementation
from [Park et al., 2023].
Full history involves retaining a complete record of all
observations and actions to inform decision-making at ev-
ery step.
Summarization, as an alternative to storing the
full history, focuses on retaining only the necessary informa-
tion while discarding the rest. The standard RAG baseline
retrieves top-k memories based on their similarity score to
the current observation and plan. Simulacra features a scor-
ing mechanism that integrates recency, importance, and rele-
vance, alongside reflections on the extracted memories. The
Reflexion baseline differs from other methods in its approach,
as it operates over multiple trials. After failing a trial, the
agent reflects on its trajectories to document information that
may assist in solving the task in subsequent trials. We used
the gpt-4-0125-preview as LLM backbone for AriGraph and
other LLM-based baselines.
Additionally, we tested our architecture on a variation of
the cooking test from [Adhikari et al., 2021] to compare it
with RL baselines. These tasks have 4 levels of difficulty,
however, they are significantly simpler than our main tasks,
having fewer locations, ingredients, and required actions (Ap-
pendix F).
For RL baselines, we collect the best results reported by
[Adhikari et al., 2021; Tuli et al., 2022; Basu et al., 2024]
for the GATA, LTL-GATA, and EXPLORER architectures on
the Cooking task with four difficulties levels from [Adhikari
et al., 2021].
To estimate human performance in the same games, we
developed a graphical user interface , allowing volunteers to
play basic versions of the Treasure Hunt, The Cleaning, and
the Cooking. After collecting the data, we excluded sessions
where the game was not completed.
4.2
NetHack environment
NetHack [K¨uttler et al., 2020] is a classic roguelike adventure
game featuring procedurally generated multi-level dungeon
(see Figure 13 in Appendix for a dungeon level example).
It poses significant challenges for both LLM-based and RL-
based approaches, requiring complex exploration, resource
management, and strategic planning.
We based our experiments on NetPlay [Jeurissen et al.,
2024] agent, which demonstrates state-of-the-art perfor-
mance among LLM agents that do not rely on finetuning or
RL. In NetPlay agent receives textual observations containing
all information about current explored dungeon level. These
B
C
A
Treasure Hunt
Cooking
Cleaning
Figure 3: AriGraph world model enables Ariadne agent to successfully solve variety of text games. (A) Ariadne outperform baseline agents
with alternative types of memory. (B) Ariadne with episodic and semantic memory scales to harder environments without losing performance.
(C) Ariadne shows performance comparable to the best human players. The Y-axis shows the normalized score, which is calculated relative
to the maximum possible points that can be obtained in each environment. Error bars show standard deviation. The number of max steps is
set to 60 in the Cooking and to 150 in other games.
observations (Level obs) effectively function as handcrafted
memory oracle for the agent.
To evaluate our Ariadne agent, we restricted textual ob-
servations to agent’s current room or corridor (Room Obs),
testing whether AriGraph world model could compensate for
this restriction by remembering all relevant level information.
We compare three agents. The first is NetPlay [Room obs]
with restricted textual observations, the second is our Ariadne
[Room obs] agent that receives Room Obs and updates Ari-
Graph, and the last is NetPlay [Level obs] with access to in-
foration about explored level.
4.3
Multi-hop Q&A
Although our memory architecture was originally designed
for an agent interacting with the environment, we evaluated
its performance on standard multi-hop Q&A benchmarks —
Musique [Trivedi et al., 2022] and HotpotQA [Yang et al.,
2018] to show its robustness and efficiency in more standard
retrieval tasks. We made slight adjustments to the promts
and replaced Contriever model with BGE-M3[Chen et al.,
2024], as it is a better fit for general text encoding.
We
used 200 random samples from both datasets similar to [Li et
al., 2024a]. We compared the performance of our approach
against Graphreader [Li et al., 2024a], ReadAgent [Lee et al.,
2024], HOLMES [Panda et al., 2024], GraphRAG [Edge et
al., 2024] and RAG baselines provided in [Li et al., 2024a].
5
Results
5.1
TextWorld
Every LLM based agent had five attempts to solve each game.
The normalized score of one means that an agent completed
the game, and score less than one represents intermediate
progress. Results on text-based games are shown on the Fig-
ure 3 (for dynamics see Appendix G). We estimate perfor-
mance as average of three best runs. Ariadne successfully re-
members and uses information about state of the world for all
three tasks. Baseline agents are unable to solve the Treasure
Hunt, and fail to find even second key in the Treasure Hunt
Hardest. On the other hand, Ariadne successfully solves the
Treasure Hunt in about fifty steps, maintains robust perfor-
mance in the Treasure Hunt Hard, and is able to complete
the Treasure Hunt Hardest with more then double amount of
rooms compared to Hard version, additional keys and distrac-
tors (see Appendix G).
Compared to the Treasure Hunt, the Cleaning game pos-
sesses a slightly different challenge as it is more important
to properly filter outdated information about object locations,
than not to lose any information. This is evident from the re-
duced usefulness of Episodic Memory in Ariadne agent and
Full history baseline, since both memory modules focus on
retaining long-term information.
Overall Ariadne notably
outperforms alternatives in this game.
Moreover, Ariadne
also outperforms Reflexion, which has additional information
between episodes [Shinn et al., 2023]. This baseline shows
markable performance growth (in comparison wuth RAG) at
the second try, but degrades with following tries.
The Cooking game has the highest difficulty, because any
error at intermediate step prevents completion of the whole
game. All baseline agents (except Reflexion 2-shot with ob-
vious advantage over other methods) fail to complete cooking
tasks due to insufficient or misused information. In this game,
episodic memory is particularly important, allowing the agent
Figure 4: Ariadne LLM agent shows top performance compared
to RL alternatives. Comparison of Ariadne and Full History base-
line (GPT-4) with RL baselines in the cooking benchmark. Ariadne
demonstrates superior performance across all 4 difficulty levels
to recall useful observations such as the content of the recipe
or cooking instructions. For token usage of every method see
Table 3, Appendix D.
Comparison with RL baselines on variation of the Cooking
task is shown in Figure 4. We run Ariadne and GPT-4 with
Full history on 4 difficulty levels from the cooking benchmark
[Adhikari et al., 2021]. Ariadne shows superior performance
to RL-agents on all 4 levels, especially harder ones. GPT-4
agent with Full history solves only first two levels which is
consistent with previous result as the Cooking from Figure
3.A is harder than level 4.
Human evaluation. Comparison with respect to human
players is shown in Figure 3.C. All Humans is the average
score of all valid (completed) human trials. Human Top-3
is the average score of three best plays for each task. Ari-
adne outperforms average human player from our sample on
all tasks, and scores similarly to the best human plays in the
Cooking and the Treasure Hunt, but underperforms in the
Cleaning.
Graph quality. We measured AriGraph’s growth rate and
update rate during gameplay (see Figure 5). The graph ac-
tively grows during the exploration phase and flattens once
the agent becomes familiar with the environment. We argue
that this indicates that agent can generalize to long interac-
tions with the environment despite constant updates to the se-
mantic graph. Additional results in Appendix C demonstrate
that the growth rate of the graph decreases with the increase
in quality of LLM backbone.
Overal results demonstrate clear advantage of Ariadne
agent over LLM based and RL baselines. Semantic mem-
ory enables the Ariadne Agent to build and update knowledge
about the current state of the POMDP environment, which is
crucial for navigation, exploration and capturing relevant de-
tails in interactive environments. On the other hand, episodic
memory assists the agent in retrieving detailed long-term in-
formation that may not be captured in semantic memory, as
demonstrated by the results in the Cooking task.
5.2
NetHack
The results are presented in Table 1. Scores column shows
average game score across 3 runs, Levels column shows av-
erage number of dungeon levels completed by an agent. GPT-
4o was used for all agents.
Underscoring the importance
of memory in this task, NetPlay [Level obs] with access to
memory oracle achieved the highest scores, while NetPlay
[Room obs] with only current room observations performed
the worst.
Ariadne [Room obs] successfully utilized Ari-
Graph word model, achieving performance comparable to the
baseline with memory oracle.
Table 1: Ariadne with obscured partial observations performs com-
parable to NetPlay agent full level information.
Method
Score
Levels
Ariadne (Room obs)
593.00 ± 202.62
6.33 ± 2.31
NetPlay (Room obs)
341.67 ± 109.14
3.67 ± 1.15
NetPlay (Level obs)
675.33 ± 130.27
7.33 ± 1.15
5.3
Multi-hop Q&A
We compared AriGraph with the latest LLM-based ap-
proaches that employ knowledge graph construction and re-
trieval techniques for question answering over documents
(Table 2). Our memory architecture, adapted from the Ari-
adne TextWorld agent, utilizing both GPT-4 and GPT-4o-
mini outperformed baseline methods like ReadAgent (GPT-
4), GPT-4 RAG, GPT-4 full context and GraphReader (GPT-
4).
GraphRAG served as a strong GPT-4o-mini baseline,
due to its extremely hight costs. ArigGraph (GPT-4o-mini)
showed weaker performance on Musique, but outperformed
GraphRAG on HotpotQA. Notably, our approach is more
then 10x cheaper in comparison to GraphRAG (Table 3, Ap-
pendix D).
The best performance using GPT-4 was achieved by
HOLMES, but AriGraph (GPT-4) exhibited comparable re-
sults.
Notably, all baseline methods were specifically de-
signed for Q&A tasks, incorporating task-specific prompt
tuning and additional architectural enhancements.
Both
GraphRAG and HOLMES employ hyper-relations in their
graphs to connect source data with extracted entities, simi-
lar to our method. However, these approaches lack mecha-
nisms for updates in dynamic environments, a key advantage
of AriGraph.
6
Related work
Voyager [Wang et al., 2023a], Ghost in the Minecraft [Zhu
et al., 2023] and Jarvis-1 [Wang et al., 2023b] are ad-
vanced, open-ended LLM agents that show significantly bet-
ter performance in Minecraft compared to earlier techniques.
These agents feature memory capabilities through a library of
learned skills, summaries of successful actions, and episodic
memory with plans for successful task execution. However,
they fall short in representing knowledge with semantic struc-
ture and depend heavily on the LLM’s extensive Minecraft
knowledge, or even access to the Minecraft wiki. Generative
agents [Park et al., 2023] mimic human behavior in multi-
agent environments and were among the pioneers in introduc-
ing an advanced memory system for LLM agents, which we
use as our baseline. Reflexion [Shinn et al., 2023] and CLIN
[Majumder et al., 2023] enables agents to reflect on past tra-
jectories, allowing them to store relevant insights about com-
Figure 5: AriGraph demonstrate good scaling during learning and with environment size. A size of the knowledge graph quickly saturates
during exploration and learning phase. KG grows moderately when the Treasure Hunt and the Cooking games include more rooms and
objects in their hard versions.
Table 2: AriGraph memory demonstrates competitive performance
on Multi-Hop Q&A datasets. Even in non interactive tasks AriGraph
is comparable to strong QA baseline agents. The best results with
the base GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini are shown in bold and underline
respectively.
Method
MuSiQue
HotpotQA
EM
F1
EM
F1
BM25(top-3)
25.0
31.1
45.7
58.5
Ada-002(top-3)
24.5
32.1
45.0
58.1
GPT-4 full context
33.5
42.7
53.0
68.4
GPT-4 + supporting facts
45.0
56.0
57.0
73.8
ReadAgent(GPT-4)
35.0
45.1
48.0
62.0
GraphReader(GPT-4)
38.0
47.4
55.0
70.0
HOLMES(GPT-4)
48.0
58.0
66.0
78.0
AriGraph(GPT-4)
45.0
57.0
68.0
74.7
GraphRAG(GPT-4o-
mini)
40.0
53.5
58.7
63.3
AriGraph(GPT-4o-mini)
36.5
47.9
60.0
68.6
pleted actions in a long-term memory module, but has no
structural representation of knowledge and episodic memo-
ries. LARP [Yan et al., 2023] utilizes the concepts of episodic
and semantic memories but treats them as separate instances
and lacks a structural representation of knowledge.
Considerable research is dedicated to leveraging estab-
lished knowledge graphs for enhancing Q&A [Baek et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2024b] systems to address the factual
knowledge deficiency observed in LLMs.
The latest re-
search demonstrating best performance in Q&A tasks in-
cludes Graphreader [Li et al., 2024a], HOLMES [Panda et
al., 2024], HippoRAG [Guti´errez et al., 2024], GraphRAG
[Edge et al., 2024] which all employ the technique of build-
ing knowledge graphs from texts. However, these studies do
not address the context of functioning within an interactive
environment, nor do they take into account the updates to
knowledge graphs prompted by new experiences.
Text-based environments [Cˆot´e et al., 2018; Hausknecht et
al., 2019; Shridhar et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022] were origi-
nally designed to evaluate reinforcement learning (RL) agents
[Guo et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2020; Ammanabrolu et al., 2020;
Ammanabrolu and Hausknecht, 2020; Tuli et al., 2022;
Adhikari et al., 2021]. Multiple experiments have already
explored the potential of LLMs in these complex scenarios
[Tsai et al., 2023; Tan et al., 2023; Momennejad et al., 2023;
Ding et al., 2024a]. However raw LLMs show poor results in
these games without proper agentic architecture and memory.
7
Conclusions
In this paper, we introduced AriGraph, a novel knowledge
graph world model tailored for LLM agents.
AriGraph
uniquely integrates semantic and episodic memories from
textual observations, providing a structured and dynamic rep-
resentation of knowledge. We evaluated this approach across
a range of interactive text-based games and multi-hop Q&A
benchmarks, comparing it against existing memory architec-
tures. To test its capabilities comprehensively, we developed
a cognitive architecture called Ariadne, which combines Ari-
Graph with planning and decision-making components.
Our results demonstrate that AriGraph significantly out-
performs other memory systems in tasks requiring long-term
memory, such as decision-making, planning, and exploration
in partially observable environments. The structured knowl-
edge representation provided by AriGraph enables efficient
retrieval and reasoning, accelerating learning and task com-
pletion. Additionally, AriGraph’s scalability was evident as
it maintained high performance even when the complexity
of tasks increased, involving more objects and locations. In
multi-hop Q&A benchmarks, AriGraph exhibited competi-
tive performance, underscoring its robustness and adaptabil-
ity beyond interactive environments.
While promising, our approach can be further enhanced
by incorporating multi-modal observations, procedural mem-
ories, and more sophisticated graph search methods.
References
[Adhikari et al., 2021] Ashutosh Adhikari,
Xingdi Yuan,
Marc-Alexandre Cˆot´e, Mikul´aˇs Zelinka, Marc-Antoine
Rondeau, Romain Laroche, Pascal Poupart, Jian Tang,
Adam Trischler, and William L. Hamilton. Learning dy-
namic belief graphs to generalize on text-based games,
2021.
[Ammanabrolu and Hausknecht, 2020] Prithviraj
Am-
manabrolu and Matthew Hausknecht. Graph constrained
reinforcement learning for natural language action spaces,
2020.
[Ammanabrolu et al., 2020] Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Ethan
Tien, Matthew Hausknecht, and Mark O. Riedl. How to
avoid being eaten by a grue: Structured exploration strate-
gies for textual worlds, 2020.
[Baek et al., 2023] Jinheon Baek, Alham Fikri Aji, and Amir
Saffari. Knowledge-augmented language model prompt-
ing for zero-shot knowledge graph question answering,
2023.
[Basu et al., 2024] Kinjal Basu,
Keerthiram Murugesan,
Subhajit Chaudhury, Murray Campbell, Kartik Tala-
madupula, and Tim Klinger. Explorer: Exploration-guided
reasoning for textual reinforcement learning, 2024.
[Bulatov et al., 2022] Aydar Bulatov,
Yuri Kuratov,
and
Mikhail S. Burtsev. Recurrent memory transformer, 2022.
[Bulatov et al., 2024] Aydar Bulatov, Yuri Kuratov, Yermek
Kapushev, and Mikhail S. Burtsev. Scaling transformer to
1m tokens and beyond with rmt, 2024.
[Chen et al., 2024] Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang,
Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. Bge m3-embedding:
Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text
embeddings through self-knowledge distillation, 2024.
[Cheng et al., 2024] Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Zheng-
wen Zhang, Xiangrui Meng, Sirui Hong, Wenhao Li, Zi-
hao Wang, Zekai Wang, Feng Yin, Junhua Zhao, and Xi-
uqiang He. Exploring large language model based intelli-
gent agents: Definitions, methods, and prospects, 2024.
[Cˆot´e et al., 2018] Marc-Alexandre
Cˆot´e,
´Akos
K´ad´ar,
Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine,
James Moore, Ruo Yu Tao, Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El
Asri, Mahmoud Adada, Wendy Tay, and Adam Trischler.
Textworld: A learning environment for text-based games.
CoRR, abs/1806.11532, 2018.
[Ding et al., 2024a] Peng Ding, Jiading Fang, Peng Li, Kan-
grui Wang, Xiaochen Zhou, Mo Yu, Jing Li, Matthew Wal-
ter, and Hongyuan Mei. MANGO: A benchmark for eval-
uating mapping and navigation abilities of large language
models, 2024.
[Ding et al., 2024b] Yiran Ding, Li Lyna Zhang, Chen-
gruidong Zhang, Yuanyuan Xu, Ning Shang, Jiahang Xu,
Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. Longrope: Extending llm con-
text window beyond 2 million tokens, 2024.
[Edge et al., 2024] Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng,
Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt,
and Jonathan Larson. From local to global: A graph rag
approach to query-focused summarization, 2024.
[Gu and Dao, 2023] Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-
time sequence modeling with selective state spaces, 2023.
[Guo et al., 2020] Xiaoxiao Guo, Mo Yu, Yupeng Gao,
Chuang Gan, Murray Campbell, and Shiyu Chang.
In-
teractive fiction game playing as multi-paragraph reading
comprehension with reinforcement learning, 2020.
[Guti´errez et al., 2024] Bernal Jim´enez Guti´errez, Yiheng
Shu, Yu Gu, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Yu Su. Hipporag:
Neurobiologically inspired long-term memory for large
language models, 2024.
[Hausknecht et al., 2019] Matthew Hausknecht, Prithviraj
Ammanabrolu, Cˆot´e Marc-Alexandre, and Yuan Xingdi.
Interactive fiction games: A colossal adventure. CoRR,
abs/1909.05398, 2019.
[Izacard et al., 2022] Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lu-
cas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand
Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Unsupervised dense informa-
tion retrieval with contrastive learning, 2022.
[Jeurissen et al., 2024] Dominik Jeurissen,
Diego Perez-
Liebana, Jeremy Gow, Duygu Cakmak, and James Kwan.
Playing nethack with llms: Potential and limitations as
zero-shot agents, 2024.
[K¨uttler et al., 2020] Heinrich
K¨uttler,
Nantas
Nardelli,
Alexander Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Ed-
ward Grefenstette, and Tim Rockt¨aschel.
The nethack
learning environment.
Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:7671–7684, 2020.
[Lee et al., 2024] Kuang-Huei Lee, Xinyun Chen, Hiroki
Furuta, John Canny, and Ian Fischer. A human-inspired
reading agent with gist memory of very long contexts,
2024.
[Li et al., 2024a] Shilong Li, Yancheng He, Hangyu Guo,
Xingyuan Bu, Ge Bai, Jie Liu, Jiaheng Liu, Xingwei Qu,
Yangguang Li, Wanli Ouyang, Wenbo Su, and Bo Zheng.
Graphreader: Building graph-based agent to enhance long-
context abilities of large language models, 2024.
[Li et al., 2024b] Yihao Li, Ru Zhang, Jianyi Liu, and
Gongshen Liu.
An enhanced prompt-based llm reason-
ing scheme via knowledge graph-integrated collaboration,
2024.
[Majumder et al., 2023] Bodhisattwa
Prasad
Majumder,
Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord,
Niket Tandon, Li Zhang, Chris Callison-Burch, and Peter
Clark. Clin: A continually learning language agent for
rapid task adaptation and generalization, 2023.
[Momennejad et al., 2023] Ida Momennejad, Hosein Hasan-
beig, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Hiteshi Sharma, Nebojsa Jojic,
Hamid Palangi, Robert Ness, and Jonathan Larson. Evalu-
ating cognitive maps and planning in large language mod-
els with cogeval. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[Murugesan et al., 2020] Keerthiram
Murugesan,
Mattia
Atzeni, Pavan Kapanipathi, Pushkar Shukla, Sadhana
Kumaravel, Gerald Tesauro, Kartik Talamadupula, Mrin-
maya Sachan, and Murray Campbell.
Text-based rl
agents with commonsense knowledge: New challenges,
environments and baselines, 2020.
[Pan et al., 2024] Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen
Chen, Jiapu Wang, and Xindong Wu. Unifying large lan-
guage models and knowledge graphs: A roadmap. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, page
1–20, 2024.
[Panda et al., 2024] Pranoy Panda, Ankush Agarwal, Chai-
tanya Devaguptapu, Manohar Kaul, and Prathosh A P.
Holmes: Hyper-relational knowledge graphs for multi-hop
question answering using llms, 2024.
[Parisotto et al., 2020] Emilio Parisotto, Francis Song, Jack
Rae, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Siddhant Jayaku-
mar, Max Jaderberg, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Aidan
Clark, Seb Noury, et al. Stabilizing transformers for re-
inforcement learning. In International conference on ma-
chine learning, pages 7487–7498. PMLR, 2020.
[Park et al., 2023] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Car-
rie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S. Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive sim-
ulacra of human behavior, 2023.
[Pleines et al., 2022] Marco
Pleines,
Matthias
Pallasch,
Frank Zimmer, and Mike Preuss. Memory gym: Partially
observable challenges to memory-based agents.
In The
eleventh international conference on learning representa-
tions, 2022.
[Shinn et al., 2023] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward
Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal re-
inforcement learning, 2023.
[Shridhar et al., 2021] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-
Alexandre Cˆot´e, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and
Matthew Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Em-
bodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (ICLR), 2021.
[Sorokin et al., 2022] Artyom
Sorokin,
Nazar
Buzun,
Leonid Pugachev, and Mikhail Burtsev. Explain my sur-
prise: Learning efficient long-term memory by predicting
uncertain outcomes.
Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 35:36875–36888, 2022.
[Sumers et al., 2024] Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao,
Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Cognitive
architectures for language agents, 2024.
[Tan et al., 2023] Qinyue Tan, Ashkan Kazemi, and Rada
Mihalcea. Text-based games as a challenging benchmark
for large language models, 2023.
[Trivedi et al., 2022] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubrama-
nian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal.
MuSiQue:
Multihop questions via single-hop question composition.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2022.
[Tsai et al., 2023] Chen Feng Tsai, Xiaochen Zhou, Sierra S.
Liu, Jing Li, Mo Yu, and Hongyuan Mei. Can large lan-
guage models play text games well? current state-of-the-
art and open questions, 2023.
[Tuli et al., 2022] Mathieu Tuli, Andrew C. Li, Pashootan
Vaezipoor, Toryn Q. Klassen, Scott Sanner, and Sheila A.
McIlraith. Learning to follow instructions in text-based
games, 2022.
[Wang et al., 2022] Ruoyao Wang,
Peter Jansen,
Marc-
Alexandre Cˆot´e, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Science-
world: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader?, 2022.
[Wang et al., 2023a] Guanzhi Wang,
Yuqi Xie,
Yunfan
Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi
Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended
embodied agent with large language models, 2023.
[Wang et al., 2023b] Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu,
Yonggang Jin, Jinbing Hou, Bowei Zhang, Haowei Lin,
Zhaofeng He, Zilong Zheng, Yaodong Yang, Xiaojian Ma,
and Yitao Liang. Jarvis-1: Open-world multi-task agents
with memory-augmented multimodal language models,
2023.
[Wang et al., 2024] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng,
Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Ji-
akai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei
Wei, and Jirong Wen. A survey on large language model
based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science,
18(6), March 2024.
[Wong Gonzalez, 2018] Daniela Wong Gonzalez. The Re-
lationship Between Semantic and Episodic Memory: Ex-
ploring the Effect of Semantic Neighbourhood Density on
Episodic Memory. PhD thesis, Electronic Theses and Dis-
sertations, 2018. Paper 7585.
[Yan et al., 2023] Ming Yan, Ruihao Li, Hao Zhang, Hao
Wang, Zhilan Yang, and Ji Yan. Larp: Language-agent
role play for open-world games, 2023.
[Yang et al., 2018] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang,
Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
and Christopher D. Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for di-
verse, explainable multi-hop question answering, 2018.
[Yao et al., 2020] Shunyu
Yao,
Rohan
Rao,
Matthew
Hausknecht, and Karthik Narasimhan.
Keep calm and
explore:
Language models for action generation in
text-based games, 2020.
[Yao et al., 2023] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan
Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language mod-
els, 2023.
[Zhu et al., 2023] Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian,
Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin
Li, Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, Yu Qiao, Zhaoxiang
Zhang, and Jifeng Dai. Ghost in the minecraft: Gener-
ally capable agents for open-world environments via large
language models with text-based knowledge and memory,
2023.
A
Memory Graph Search Details
Pseudo-code for SemanticSearch function in AriGraph
is listed in Algorithm 2.
This algorithm is close to
BFS search.
The main difference is the use of retrieval
mechanism in function EmbedAndRetrieve.
Func-
tion EmbedAndRetrieve(E, q, w) uses pretrained Con-
triever [Izacard et al., 2022] model to compute embeddings
for edges E and query q and then returns top w edges with a
highest similarity score. Similarity score between edge e and
query q is a dot product between their embeddings. Most of
the times, when query for EmbedAndRetrieve is a seman-
tic vertex, it simply returns edges incident to this vertex, but
also has ability to retrieve edges connected to vertices that are
semantically close to the query vertex. For example, semantic
graph can contain separate vertices for ”grill” and ”grilling”
that are not directly connected, so searching for ”grill” can
potentially return edge (”bbq”, ”used for”, ”grilling”).
Algorithm 2: Semantic Search
Input: search query q, Es, search depth d, search
width w
Result: relevant vertices semantic V q
s and edges Eq
s
Eq
s ←∅
L ←∅
// init empty
queue of queries
Enqueue(L, q)
// push q into
queue L
D[q] ←0
// set search
distance for q to zero
while L is not empty do
q′ ←Dequeue(L)
// remove
first element from L
if D[q′] ≥d then
continue
end
// use Contriever model to find
top w triplets closest to q′
E′
s ←EmbedAndRetrieve(Es, q′, w)
foreach ei in E′
s do
V ′
s ←IncidentVertices(ei)
// returns two incident
semantic vertices
foreach v in V ′
s do
if v not in L then
Enqueue(L, v)
D[v] ←D[q′] + 1
end
end
end
Eq
s ←Eq
s ∪E′
s
end
return Eq
s
B
Exploration
Before any planning or decision-making occurs, an auxil-
iary agent assesses the need for exploration based on a pre-
established plan.
Depending on this assessment, it either
activates or deactivates exploration mode.
Moreover, the
graph agent extracts triplets containing information about ex-
its, such as ”kitchen, has an unexplored exit, south,” and
triplets detailing spatial connections between locations like
”hall, east of, kitchen.” Subsequently, simple graph-based
methods can be employed to identify all exits from each room
that the agent has detected but not yet explored. This informa-
tion is then added to the working memory of the agent. Func-
tion for finding triplets corresponding to probable unexplored
actions is listed in Algorithm 3. Current implementation uses
expert knowledge about what elements of the semantic graph
can represent locations and exits between them.
Algorithm 3: Unexplored exit detection
Input: Vs, Es, Ve, Ee, current location vl
Result: triplets Eexp
s
with information about
unexplored exits from vl
Eexp ←∅
Eout ←GetOutgoing(Es, vl)
// get
semantic edges outgoing from vl
foreach e in Eout do
if RepresentExit(e) then
Eexp ←Eexp ∪{e}
Ein ←GetIncoming(Es, vl)
// get
semantic edges incoming in vl
foreach e in Ein do
if RepresentExit(e) then
// remove exits leading to
explored locations
Eexp ←
Eexp \ {FindRelatedExit(Eexp, e)}
return Eexp
C
Graph statistics
When working with a graph, it would be advantageous to
assess the quality of its construction. Unfortunately, due to
the variability in its construction (e.g., the use of synonyms,
equivalent restructuring of connections, etc.), direct measure-
ment of its correspondence to the true graph is extremely
challenging. Moreover, the inclusion of information in the
constructed graph that is not present in the true graph is not
always detrimental and can sometimes yield positive effects.
For these reasons, we did not measure the quality of the graph
but instead measured its growth rate and update rate during
gameplay (Fig.5). Furthermore, we conducted a separate ex-
periment in which the graph was constructed according to
our pipeline, but the agent’s actions were chosen randomly
(Fig.6). The Cleaning environment was chosen for this set-
ting because, unlike the Treasure Hunt, it contains a large va-
riety of objects with which the agent can interact, and unlike
the Cooking, the agent cannot fail. In this setting, we also
measured the graph’s growth rate and update rate.
From the obtained results, one can conclude that the
graph grows most actively during the exploration phase but
Figure 6: Statistics of graph construction and updating during the random walk.
maintains a slower growth rate when the agent operates
within the familiar parts of the environment. Additionally,
it is evident that the growth rate of the graph decreases as the
quality of the LLM used in its construction increases.
D
Token usage
Table 3: Token Usage Analysis for Text Games and QA Tasks
Method
Prompt Tokens
Completion Tokens
Text Games (per step)
Ariadne agent
6,000
500
RAG memory agent
4,000
350
Summary memory agent
3,800
350
Full history memory agent (step 150)
14,000
350
Simulacra memory agent
7,500
400
Reflexion memory agent
5,800
350
QA Benchmarks (per task)
AriGraph
11,000
2,500
GraphRAG
115,000
20,000
E
LLM Prompts
Triplet Extraction Prompt
Guidelines for Building the Knowledge Graph:
Creating Nodes and Triplets: Nodes should depict entities
or concepts, similar to Wikipedia nodes. Use a
structured triplet format to capture data, as follows
: "subject, relation, object". For example, from "
Albert Einstein, born in Germany, is known for
developing the theory of relativity," extract "Albert
Einstein, country of birth, Germany; Albert Einstein
, developed, Theory of Relativity."
Remember that you should break complex triplets like "John,
position, engineer in Google" into simple triplets
like "John, position, engineer", "John, work at,
Google".
Length of your triplet should not be more than 7 words. You
should extract only concrete knowledges, any
assumptions must be described as hypothesis.
For example, from phrase "John have scored many points and
potentiallyy will be winner" you should extract "John
, scored many, points; John, could be, winner" and
should not extract "John, will be, winner".
Remember that object and subject must be an atomary units
while relation can be more complex and long.
If observation states that you take item, the triplet shoud
be: ’item, is in, inventory’ and nothing else.
Do not miss important information. If observation is ’book
involves story about knight, who needs to kill a
dragon’, triplets should be ’book, involves, knight’,
’knight, needs to kill, dragon’. If observation
involves some type of notes, do not forget to include
triplets about entities this note includes.
There could be connections between distinct parts of
observations. For example if there is information in
the beginning of the observation that you are in
location, and in the end it states that there is an
exit to the east, you should extract triplet: ’
location, has exit, east’.
Several triplets can be extracted, that contain information
about the same node. For example ’kitchen, contains,
apple’, ’kitchen, contains, table’, ’apple, is on,
table’. Do not miss this type of connections.
Other examples of triplets: ’room z, contains, black locker
’; ’room x, has exit, east’, ’apple, is on, table’, ’
key, is in, locker’, ’apple, to be, grilled’, ’potato
, to be, sliced’, ’stove, used for, frying’, ’recipe,
requires, green apple’, ’recipe, requires, potato’.
Do not include triplets that state the current location of
an agent like ’you, are in, location’.
Do not use ’none’ as one of the entities.
If there is information that you read something, do not
forget to incluse triplets that state that entitie
that you read contains information that you extract.
Example of triplets you have extracted before: {example}
Observation: {observation}
Remember that triplets must be extracted in format: "
subject_1, relation_1, object_1; subject_2,
relation_2, object_2; ..."
Extracted triplets:’’’
Outdated Triplet Selection Prompt
The triplets denote facts about the environment where the
player moves. The player takes actions and the
environment changes, so some triplets from the list
of existing triplets can be replaced with one of the
new triplets. For example, the player took the item
from the locker and the existing triplet "item, is in
, locker" should be replaced with the new triplet "
item, is in, inventory".
Sometimes there are no triplets to replace:
Example of existing triplets: "Golden locker, state, open";
"Room K, is west of, Room I"; "Room K, has exit,
east".
Example of new triplets: "Room T, is north of, Room N"; "
Room T, has exit, south".
Example of replacing: []. Nothisg to replace here
Sometimes several triplets can be replaced with one:
Example of existing triplets: "kitchen, contains, broom"; "
broom, is on, floor".
Example of new triplets: "broom, is in, inventory".
Example of replacing: [["kitchen, contains, broom" -> "
broom, is in, inventory"], ["broom, is on, floor" ->
"broom, is in, inventory"]]. Because broom changed
location from the floor in the kitchen to players
inventory.
Ensure that triplets are only replaced if they contain
redundant or conflicting information about the same
aspect of an entity. Triplets should not be replaced
if they provide distinct or complementary information
about entities compared to the new triplets.
Specifically, consider the relationships, properties,
or contexts described by each triplet and verify
that they align before replacement. If there is
uncertainty about whether a triplet should be
replaced, prioritize retaining the existing triplet
over replacing it. When comparing existing and new
triplets, if they refer to different aspects or
attributes of entities, do not replace them.
Replacements should only occur when there is semantic
duplication between an existing triplet and a new
triplet.
Example of existing triplets: "apple, to be, cooked", ’
knife, used for, cutting’, ’apple, has been, sliced’
Example of new triplets: "apple, is on, table", ’kitchen,
contsins, knife’, ’apple, has beed, grilled’.
Example of replacing: []. Nothing to replace here. These
triplets describe different properties of items, so
they should not be replaced.
Another example of when not to replase existung triplets:
Example of existing triplets: "brush, used for, painting".
Example of new triplets: "brush, is in, art class".
Example of replacing: []. Nothing to replace here. These
triplets describe different properties of brush, so
they should not be replaced.
I repeat, do not replace triplets, if they carry differend
type of information about entities!!! It is better to
leave a tripplet, than to replace the one that has
important information. Do not state that triplet
needs to be replaced if you are not sure!!!
If you find triplet in Existing triplets which semantically
duplicate some triplet in New triplets, replace such
triplet from Existing triplets. However do not
replace triplets if they refer to different things.
####
Generate only replacing, no descriptions are needed.
Existing triplets: {ex_triplets}.
New triplets: {new_triplets}.
####
Warning! Replacing must be generated strictly in following
format: [[outdated_triplet_1 -> actual_triplet_1], [
outdated_triplet_2 -> actual_triplet_2], ...], you
MUST NOT include any descriptions in answer.
Replacing:
Exploration check prompt
####
INSTRUCTION:
You will be provided with sub-goals and reasons for it from
plan of an agent. Your task is to state if this sub
goals require exploration of the environment, finding
or locating something.
Answer with just True or False.
####
Plan:
{plan0}
Planning prompt
####
INSTRUCTION:
You are a planner within the agent system tasked with
navigating the environment in a text-based game.
Your role is to create a concise plan to achieve your main
goal or modify your current plan based on new
information received.
Make sure your sub-goals will benefit the achivment of your
main goal. If your main goal is an ongoing complex
process, also put sub-goals that can immediately
benifit achiving something from your main goal.
If you need to find something, put it into sub-goal.
If you wish to alter or delete a sub-goal within the
current plan, confirm that this sub-goal has been
achieved according to the current observation or is
no longer relevant to achieving your main goal.
Untill then do not change wording in "sub_goal"
elements of your plan and their position in the plan.
Only change wording in "reason" part to track the
progress of completion of sub-goals.
If sub-goal was completed or confirmed to be no more
relevant, delete it, replase it with new one or with
lower priority sub-goals from the plan. Untill then
keep the structure of sub-goals as it is. Create new
sub-goals only if they will benifit your main goal
and do not prioritize them over current sub-goals.
If your task is to obtain something, make shure that the
item is in your inventory before changing your sub-
goal.
Your plan contains important information and goals you need
to complete. Do not alter sub-goals or move them in
hierarchy if they were not completed!
Pay attention to your inventory, what items you are carring
, when setting the sub-goals. These items might be
important.
Pay attention to information from your memory module, it is
important.
There should always be at least one sub-goal.
State the progress of completing your sub-goals in "reason"
for each sub-goal.
Write your answer exactly in this json format:
{ "main_goal": "...",
"plan_steps": [{
"sub_goal_1": "...",
"reason": "..."
},
{
"sub_goal_2": "...",
"reason": "..."
},
{
"sub_goal_...": "...",
"reason": "..."
}],
"your_emotion":
{
"your_current_emotion": "emotion",
"reason_behind_emotion": "..."
}}
Do not write anything else.
####
1. Main goal: {main_goal}
2. History of {n_prev} last observations and actions: {
observations}
3. Your current observation: {observation}
4. Information from the memory module that can be relevant
to current situation: {subgraph}
5. Your {topk_episodic} most relevant episodic memories
from the past for the current situation: {
top_episodic}.
6. Your previous plan: {plan0}
*if is explore* 7. Yet unexplored exits in the environment:
{all_unexpl_exits}
ReAct decision making prompt
####
INSTRUCTION:
You are an action selector within an agent system designed
to navigate an environment in a text-based game. Your
role involves receiving information about an agent
and the state of the environment alongside a list of
possible actions.
Your primary objective is to choose an action from the list
of possible actions that aligns with the goals
outlined in the plan, giving precedence to main goal
or sub-goals in the order they appear (main goal is
highest priority, then sub_goal_1, sub_goal_2, etc.).
However, prioritize sub-goals that can be solved by
perfroming single action in current situation, like ’
take something’, over long term sub-goals.
Actions like "go to ’location’" will move an agent directly
to stated location, use them instead of "go_west’
type of actions, if the destination you want to move
to is further than 1 step away.
In tasks centered around exploration or locating something,
prioritize actions that guide the agent to
previously unexplored areas. You can deduce which
locations have been visited based on the history of
observations and information from your memory module.
Performing same action typically will not provide different
results, so if you are stuck, try to perform other
actions or prioritize goals to explore the
environment.
You may choose actions only from the list of possible
actions. You must choose strictly one action.
Write your answer exactly in this json format:
{
"reason_for_action": "reason"
"action_to_take": "selected action"
}
Do not write anything else.
####
1. Main goal: {main_goal}
2. History of {n_prev} last observations and actions: {
observations}
3. Your current observation: {observation}
4. Information from the memory module that can be relevant
to current situation: {subgraph}
5. Your {topk_episodic} most relevant episodic memories
from the past for the current situation: {
top_episodic}.
6. Your current plan: {plan0}
7. Yet unexplored exits in the environment: {
all_unexpl_exits}
Possible actions in current situation: {valid_actions}
Summarization prompt
####
INSTRUCTION:
You are a guide within a team of agents engaging in a text-
based game. Your role is to concisely yet thoroughly
detail all the essential aspects of the current
situation. Ensure that your summary aids in
information extraction and facilitates the decision-
making process by focusing on pertinent details and
excluding extraneous information. Incorporate a
strategic outlook in your narrative, emphasizing
information integral to forming a tactical plan.
Accurately relay the outcomes of previously attempted
actions, as this is pivotal for shaping subsequent
choices. Your account will form the sole basis on
which the decision-making agents operate; thus,
clarity and avoidance of potential confusion are
paramount.
Be judicious with your inferences, presenting only well-
substantiated information that is likely to be of
practical benefit. Your account should be succinct,
encapsulated within a maximum of three paragraphs.
####
1. Main goal: {main_goal}
2. History of {n_prev} last observations and actions: {
observations}
3. Your current observation: {observation}
4. Your previous summary: {summary}
Your summary:
F
Text-based Games
Treasure Hunting. The primary objective is to unlock the
golden locker and retrieve the treasure hidden within. The
game consists of rooms each featuring a locker of a different
color. Initially, the player finds a key in the first room, along
with instructions detailing which specific locker this key can
unlock. Each subsequent locker contains another key and a
note directing the player to the next key’s location, creating
a chain of clues and discoveries leading to the golden locker.
The easy variation has 12 rooms and 4 keys and hard one
has 16 rooms and 5 keys, however second key is significantly
harder to find. The hardest variation consist of 36 total rooms,
7 keys and also additional items in each room as noise. Agent
receives 1 point for picking a key and 1 point for completing
the game. Examples of the Treasure Hunt environment are
presented in figures 7, 8 9
Cleaning. The goal is to clean the house that consists of
9 distinct rooms, each designated for a specific purpose, such
as a pool, kitchen, etc. Each room contains items, some of
which are misplaced, for example, a toothbrush found in the
dining room. There are total of 11 misplaced items. The
agent’s objective is to tidy up the house by identifying items
that are out of place and returning them to their appropriate
locations. This task requires the agent to utilize reasoning
skills to determine the proper locations for items and to ef-
fectively recall from memory where each item belongs, while
simultaneously managing multiple tasks. Agent receives 1
point for picking up every displaced items, 1 point for plac-
ing an item in the right location and -1 for manipulation with
correctly placed item. Our task is conceptually similar to the
TextWorld Commonsense (TWC) benchmark[Murugesan et
al., 2020]. However, while TWC primarily centers on logical
reasoning within one or at most two locations, our emphasis
is on environmental exploration and the testing of memory
based on past observations. Consequently, we have substan-
tially expanded the number of rooms and items in our setup.
Example of the Cleaning environment can be found in figure
10.
Cooking. The goal is to prepare and consume a meal. First
an agent needs to find a recipe that provides detailed instruc-
tions, including required ingredients and specific preparation
methods such as dicing, slicing, chopping, grilling, frying,
and roasting. Medium difficulty task features 9 locations and
3 ingredients and hard task features 12 locations and 4 in-
gredients. The agent receives points for correctly selecting
ingredients and executing the proper procedures. The game
is considered lost if the agent performs any incorrect action
or uses an inappropriate tool for a given ingredient. We en-
hanced the initial observation with instructions and provided
explanations for specific actions to tailor the task for LLM
models, particularly concerning the appropriate use of house-
hold kitchen appliances for different actions with ingredients.
For instance, a BBQ should be used for grilling, while a stove
is appropriate for frying (see Appendix E for prompt). This
allows to test the agent’s ability to remember and adhere to
instructions. Examples of the Cooking environment are pre-
sented in figures 11, 12.
RL comparison benchmark. We tested our architecture
on a variation of the Cooking test from [Adhikari et al., 2021]
to compare it with RL baselines. These tasks have 4 levels
of difficulty, however, they are significantly simpler than our
main tasks, having fewer locations, ingredients, and required
actions.
• Level 1: 1 ingredient, 1 room, cutting.
• Level 2: 1 ingredient, 1 room, cutting + cooking.
• Level 3: 1 ingredient, 9 rooms, no processing.
• Level 4: 3 ingredients, 6 rooms, cutting + cooking.
We tested or agent and raw GPT-4 with full history on 3 ran-
domly generated environments for each task difficulty. We
slightly adapted the task for the LLM models. We gave the in-
struction to grill, roast or fry the ingredient using appropriate
kitchen tools such as BBQ, oven and stove in the first observa-
tion of the game. RL agent can learn this rules by interacting
with the environment, however, this is not a commonsense
knowledge and without this instruction the game becomes
unbeatable for LLM-agents and human players. While this
adaptation should not impact the difficulty level, it’s impor-
tant to note that the environments for comparison between
LLM and RL models were not 100% identical.
G
Additional graphics and tables
This section presents the step-by-step dynamics of perfor-
mance of different agents and human players (figure.14) .
Additionally, this section includes a table summarizing the re-
sults of all experiments across three versions of the Treasure
Hunt (Medium, Hard, Hardest), three versions of the Cooking
(Medium, Hard, Hardest), and the Cleaning (table 4).
Figure 7: Treasure Hunt environment
Treasure
Hunt
Treasure
Hunt
Hard
Treasure
Hunt
Hardest
Cooking
Cooking
Hard
Cooking
Hardest
Cleaning
Full History
0.47
-
-
0.18
-
-
0.05
Summary
0.33
0.17
-
0.52
0.21
-
0.35
RAG
0.33
0.17
-
0.36
0.17
-
0.39
Reflexion
0.93
-
-
1.0
-
-
0.27
Simulacra
0.4
-
-
0.3
-
-
0.7
AriGraph
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.65
0.79
AriGraph w/o exploration
0.87
-
-
0.87
-
-
0.76
AriGraph w/o episodic
1.0
0.67
-
0.64
0.45
-
0.92
AriGraph LLaMA-3-70B
0.47
-
-
0.67
-
-
0.5
Human Top-3
1.0
-
-
1.0
-
-
1.0
Human All
0.96
-
-
0.32
-
-
0.59
Table 4: All normalised scores across all tasks in TextWorld environment. Based on the results, it is evident that the agent with AriGraph
significantly outperforms all baselines and scales well to larger and more complex environments. An important outcome is that our agent
demonstrated near-human performance in text-based games, which has not been previously achieved using LLM.
Figure 8: Treasure Hunt hard environment
Figure 9: Treasure Hunt hardest environment
Figure 10: Cleaning environment
Figure 11: Cooking environment
Figure 12: Cooking hard environment
Figure 13: Example of NetHack level
Figure 14: Performance Dynamics in Test Games. In the Treasure Hunt, the Ariadne agent delivers performance comparable to top players;
in the Cleaning task, it falls slightly behind, but in the Cooking, it surpasses top human players in speed. The hard variants of the tasks
demonstrate that the quality of Ariadne’s performance does not decrease with increasing task difficulty, and also highlight the importance of
episodic memory.
